===== PAGE 0001 =====

Hydrogen Man and the Lourdes Hydrofix Premium Edition
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pirHGiSA-JU

all. Uh,
it's very, very nice to be able to
stream live through Rumble and Mr. Astro
Theology,
Mr. Astro Theology is back. I don't know
how long for, but uh, we'll see. I
believe David Ike got his channel back
after six years today as well.
Now friends, I'm with a very very good
personal friend of mine who I've known
for more than seven, eight years, but I
met Greg the hydrogen man um in Oregon
when I was staying in Oregon in 2019. It
was October and I did the first hydrogen
uh holy hydrogen interview with Greg and
you can now go to the channel you're
watching this on and put hydrogen just
the word hydrogen in there and you'll
see all the shows that I've done with
Greg over the years. And um welcome
Greg. Much love
>> brother. It's so great to see you. I'm
so glad you got your channel back. You
know, I think it's important for
everybody to know you sometimes you just
have to stay strong, stay diligent.
You're going to go through hard times.
And as much as we probably hate the bad
times, oftentimes they'll make us
stronger if we can just endure. And and
you have endured, my friend, I' I've
been with you pretty much every step of
the way, right? And uh and I've seen the
ups and downs. And so I'm I'm so happy
for you and I'm so glad that uh that
you're back because the world needs to
hear the information that you have. Um
because to me the the the knowledge of
the stars has a lot to do with
understanding basically God's calendar,
right? And uh and and that has
everything to do with hydrogen, too,
because what what are the stars made of?
They're made of hydrogen and helium, but
you know, basically all hydrogen. And um
and I think that people forget about the
work of Masaru Emoto. You remember um I
don't have the book here with me but the
hidden messages in water. People have to
realize the majority of water is made of
hydrogen
you know and so all these things are
really coming to a culmination point
even with the age of Aquarius because
the age of Aquarius in my opinion has to
do with the knowledge of water and
ultimately hydrogen.
So this is exciting man.
>> I agree brother. I mean, I've I I use
the hydrogen machine every day since
I've first got mine about four or five
years ago, right? So, and I breathe
I use the the breather in in the
nostrils one hour every day.
>> Yeah, that's you know, and I think it's
really important the way that it affects
the pineal gland. I don't think people
have realized this yet and I've
definitely realized it in time because
it took time and and it connects you to
the universe because if you look at the
cosmos it's made of mostly hydrogen you
know and I and the word hydrogen by the
way actually means that which becomes
water
so this is again this is all really
important what we can do medically um we
were talking about this doctor uh this
is a really interesting story we were
talking about this off camera so crazy
there's a doctor who contacted me,
right? And this is like a really smart
doctor, also a surgeon, by the way. And
this particular doctor has type 1
diabetes. Uh he also has a lot of gut
issues
and he also has CFS, chronic fatigue
syndrome,
and he just can't resolve his problems.
And his wife is also a doctor, right?
And here this guy contacts me. He's
like, "Man, I need help." And and he has
brain fog, right? which he really said
he needed to rectify because he's doing
surgery on people, right? I mean, this
needs to be resolved. So, I don't know
how he found me, but he found me and he
said, "Look, I trust you completely."
And I was kind of shocked about that.
I'm like, I know my protocols can do,
but this guy was like, "Absolute trust.
I'm going to do what you say, but here's
the interesting part. He's going to
track everything. He's been doing all
sorts of blood work. He's been obviously
tracking blood glucose because he's a
diabetic. He was tracking some stuff in
regards to his gut health and obviously
the CFS is pretty easy to track because
if he doesn't feel fatigue, he's
obviously feeling better. And I just got
a text from him the day before yesterday
and he sent me the medical results. He
said, "Dude," and this guy, by the way,
he had tried like the hydrogen tablets,
uh, some of the little cheap hydrogen
products, but it wasn't doing anything
for him. And so he was going to kind of
give up, but he found me. He goes
through my protocol and when he wrote me
back, he said, "Brother, you are not
gonna believe the results that I'm
seeing and all the data." So this guy is
actually gathering data. And by the way,
he's only using so he's using the best
equipment, you know, the one from Holy
Hydrogen, the Japanese equipment.
Because here's the other thing, Santos,
did you know that like 99% of all the
machines out there and all hydrogen
equipment is all from China?
It's all poisonous. You know, you know
how many people say to me, "Oh, I'm
breathing in hydrogen. I'm taking
hydrogen." And I say, "Which which
machine are you using?" "Oh, it's um
what's that one that you uh
>> Oh, you're talking about the Browns
gas." Probably
>> Brown's gas. And And I say to these
people, "Stop taking that. If you take
that,
>> you are going to die." Well, you know,
this is important because, you know, I
don't make any medical claims and give
medical advice and I and I don't make
any claims for or against any products.
All I will say is this. I studied I, by
the way, I went to Japan and studied all
hydrogen production methods. I became a
hydrogen production specialist. I know
every modality of making hydrogen from
chemical reactions, direct ionization,
injecting the gas, all sorts. I know
every single modality.
I don't even need to name products
because I don't want to do that because,
you know, I don't want I don't want to
like uh throw any company under the bus.
That's not what I'm trying to do. I want
the best for people. That's what I'm
here for. All you have to do is look at
the type of metal that are used in
equipment. And a lot of devices use
stainless steel. Don't use anything with
stainless steel.
>> It's not designed for human consumption.
There is no Japanese equipment that uses
stainless steel because of the high
amount of chromium hexavailent chromium.
If you ever you ever heard of the mo did
you ever hear of the movie the the Aaron
Brochovich movie?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. That was chromium 6 hexavalent
chromium. That was the whole issue
behind the the thing with Aaron
Brockovich. And so you have to have very
pure metal but that's just part of the
technology. You also you don't want to
use anything that uses chemicals like
lie or sodium hydroxide in my opinion.
That's another thing that's not even
allowed in Japan by the way, but in
America and other countries are doing
it. And so, you know, but so making
hydrogen the right way really matters.
And this particular doctor, this is
going to be really great Santos for us
going into the future because everything
he's achieved to date has been only with
the water from the holy hydrogen device.
He's not even doing inhalation yet
because he wanted to see the difference
between how each works because they do
work a little differently and I have a
protocol where you use both. So, he's
going to just do one and then he's going
to just do the other and then we're
going to do the one where I combine it
in a specific way. And right now, now
this is nuts for anybody who understands
diabetes. You know what type the
difference between type one and type two
diabetes, right?
>> Yeah. Assume
>> this guy's type one. Okay. And he did my
protocol. And people are gonna hate
this, but remember facts are facts. He
increased his carbohydrate intake. Okay.
Which is crazy.
>> Yeah.
>> And he re with this protocol, he had to
reduce the amount of insulin he's using
by almost 80%.
Which is so bonkers when you increase
your carbohydrate intake. And the reason
is is because it really does matter what
type of carbohydrates you're intaking.
You can't just throw them all in the
same category. It's just not the same.
So, you know, he's doing actually a lot
of um So, there's new data, by the way,
Santos that came out even for people who
can't afford to do hydrogen properly. I
get asked that a lot. New info about
fiber,
brother. God's food is magical. And I
say God's food, I'm talking like the
plants, you know, fruits, vegetables,
nuts, seeds, beans, mushrooms. You know,
they found a special compound in all
mushrooms in Japan that it appears that
if you ate them four times a week, 90%
of the people in the world who have
dementia wouldn't have dementia.
Mushrooms are magical, brother. The
Japanese are really figuring this stuff
out. And in the protocol, of course, I
use the hydrogen. That's pivotal and
clean water is pivotal. And the results
are just astronomical. The doctor
literally thinks he's like, "Man, this
should be literally worthy of a Nobel
Prize." And so, we're going to keep
working on it, getting more medical
data. In fact, um, numerous doctors have
been contacting me when they see the
results, but this guy's tracking
everything. So, I'm really, really happy
with, uh, what's going on. And that's
just the beginning. There was another
guy with Parkinson's. I got video
footage of this guy. He couldn't even
stand up, let alone walk. He couldn't
stand. I got footage of him walking. So,
hydrogen, it took about three months and
he's walking. That's a big deal. Um,
I've seen people with dementia and
Alzheimer's, you know, people with brain
fog, you know, this is really, really
important to get your brain back, you
know, so that's been a really big one,
too. But I also just like the way it
connects me to the cosmos. I mean,
you're taking in light. That's
basically, in my opinion, what hydrogen
is. And we found a way to take it in to
our bodies both through the water into
the blood and the inhalation to the
brain, to the lungs, you know, to the
third to the pineal gland. So, and this
is all this is all in my opinion the
knowledge that's coming with the whole
age of Aquarius. You know, I think the
age of Aquarius has a lot to do with the
knowledge of water and hydrogen.
Actually, hydrogen is going to change
the world. Um, I really want eventually
I want to try to reach I mean I've had a
hard time with this because I want to
reach certain people so we can try to I
know that hydrogen is not just good for
health and athletics but also for a lot
of things to do with the brain but also
I want to see how we can use it for
agriculture
so we can grow food that brother the
world has not seen for thousands of
years. Food can be so much more. You
know how they say, "Let food be thy
medicine?" Food can be way more powerful
than anything we've seen. It just has to
be grown a certain way, you know, and
and and people haven't begun to see
that. Um I got I realized this when in
Japan they were doing a study where they
would take food and they would test how
powerful, for example, how much how many
antioxidants were in the food and they
would put it in hydrogen water and
brother the hydrogen goes into the food.
They take it out 20 minutes later and
test it and the power of it is not just
a little bit stronger. It's off the
charts. It It enhances food in such a
major way. I mean, it's just doing so
many exciting things. And I just think
it's going to be really really pivotal,
especially because I'm sure you probably
are aware they're attacking our body.
They're attacking the temple of God, you
know, and they're doing it by putting
stuff in the water, stuff in the food,
stuff in the air, stuff in certain
medicines which will remain nameless. uh
stuff everywhere. It's just absolutely
everywhere. And they want you to be
foggy. They want you to be disconnected.
I was just invited recently to go to
California. I just got back and brother,
the people there. It's honestly zombies,
man. People walking right into the
middle of the street in traffic, people.
I mean, just it was unbelievable. I had
never seen California that way. And it's
so sad. and um and it felt like a fog
over the city, you know, and I think
they they definitely go for the some of
the more special places. I think
California is really special, you know,
and so there's just been a lot going on.
It's been really wild. But the thing the
other thing that I really like about
when you use hydrogen properly is how
much it protects you, you know. Um that
that's a big thing that I don't think
people realize. And right now we we need
that protection, you know, we need it
more than ever right now. M yeah, we do.
Um
if if people if people aren't taking
care of their health because of all of
these attacks, they're just going to end
up in hospitals. Um you know, if you
want to stay out of hospitals, you just
have to do a lot of work on yourself,
guys. and sometimes technology. I've got
probably about
15 different technological devices
in my home that uh support my health.
So, but this is this is one of my
favorite
the hydrogen water. As I said, my
listeners on Mr. Astro Theology will
know that you and I have done probably
about eight nine shows. Yeah. On and
they're all different. And today you've
got some more special information to
share which you've never shared before.
So every time we do one, you always seem
to you're like
me with synretatism. I'm I I just every
day I hone in on synretatism, right? You
you're doing you're doing the same with
hydrogen, which is incredible, man.
A lot of people can't can't devote
themselves to one subject so much, you
know, but you're every time you contact
me, you've got something new and
something more and better and that
you've discovered. So, I can't wait to
hear I I did put that video. I saw you
you put uploaded a video on Instagram. I
grabbed it straight away and I said to
my tech guy, put it on Mr. Astro
theology straight away. People need to
hear this. So all the listeners go back
about six or seven videos on Mr. Astroth
theology and listen. We won't we won't
let Greg tell us everything about this
doctor now because he's already said it
and it's on this very channel. So you
can hear what the how uh it helped this
doctor. Um so we probably if you want to
mention a little bit about that feel
free to do so but I'd like to hear all
the new stuff.
>> Yeah. And the other thing is I would
recommend for people to share that video
because people are not they don't they
don't know the magic of this particular
equipment that the doctor used that also
changed my life and that's the same one
that you use because people don't
understand that how you make hydrogen
matters. It really it it's dramatically
different. Like if I give you an example
okay I'll give you an example because
obviously the hydrogen tablets are
something that a lot of people know
about. Hydrogen's supposed to be
odorless, colorless, tasteless, pH
neutral. Okay? When you drop a hydrogen
tablet, it's not odorless, it's not
colorless, it's not tasteless, and it's
not even pH neutral. It actually makes
the water get really acidic, right? So,
it's like and and you probably don't
want to be inhaling the gases from that.
So, it's all about purity. In fact, the
story I don't your viewers probably
don't know this either, and it's really
important. And it's beautiful. Actually,
the story behind the equipment, the
Japanese equipment that I'm using, it
wouldn't even exist if it wasn't for
this man with what a heart, dude. His
daughter was born with some major
medical problems. And they told him that
his daughter would probably be lucky to
make it to the age of three or five
years old. And he wanted to give her
different hydrogen. He tried to buy all
this equipment, tablets, all this stuff.
But the doctor apparently told him, "You
can't give her any of this stuff. She's
way, way, way too sensitive um to any
type of contaminant." So, it has to be
of the utmost purity. And I'm a purist.
When I say I'm a purist, I like my food
without pesticides and herbicides and
fungicides. And I I like my water super
clean. I have a lab report right here.
We can talk about what's in water and
even show people how to clean their
water properly. Because if you think
that your average water filter is
cleaning your water, you might want to
think again.
>> Can I please jump in with that?
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> Okay, so I always distilled my water.
There's my Oh, you can't see it, but
it's over there. Anyway,
>> I always distill my water, right? I was
living in Queensland
and I was uh the place had a tank which
gathered rainwater and filtered it.
right now. Every day or every second
day, I would distill a gallon of water.
And at the bottom of the distiller,
there's always something, isn't there? A
little bit of film or something. Right
now,
>> right, so
there was a little bit of white powder
and I could wipe it with a tissue. Just
wipe it off and then start again.
Now, so I moved from Queensland to go
back home to Victoria before I moved to
America in August of 2019. Went to my
mother's place, stayed there for about
six weeks.
And she had this filter, right? This she
bought it and it had layers of carbon
and little stones and you know those
filters, they've got layers and layers
and layers.
>> Yes.
So, I had my distiller with me, brother,
and
I was horrified when I opened that thing
up.
There was a cake of cement about
an eighth of an inch thick.
>> It destroyed. I put I put water in from
my mother's filter. She She spent $600
for that filter. It's a bench filter.
Big big thing like this and my mother's
drinking tea every day. When I saw that,
I said, "Mom, you you you've got to do
something different." It destroyed
my distill. I was going to leave it to
her as a gift before I came to America,
but I couldn't clean it. I even if I had
a even if I had a hammer and chisel
there, it was like cement gone,
finished, destroyed. Imagine what those
filters. so-called filters are doing for
humans to people. They don't work.
>> You're absolutely right. I do I have a
whole video about it, my video 388 if
people want to watch a detailed
explanation as to why they don't work
very good. And interesting that you said
about that cement stuff because a
laboratory, there's been numerous
laboratories who've been doing tests on
actually things like the Browns gas,
things like the tablets and people have
been releasing videos out there and they
said that when they tested the tablets
on the glass beaker, it leaves what's
like cement. They said we couldn't get
it off. And you know what they had to do
to get it off? They had to use acids.
Now just think about what's that doing
to you internally, right? To your
kidneys specifically. Um, and so purity
when it comes to hydrogen, just like
oxygen, you know, just like the air you
breathe, purity is of the utmost
importance for our health. We don't want
chemicals in our stuff. And again, here
I have a third party lab test. This is
just about what's in our water and all
these different chemicals. But there's
pages of them. I mean, just pages,
brother. I mean, so much stuff. And and
you know who this affects the most,
Santos, here. Check it out. Because I
didn't realize this till I became a
water expert doing all my research. Who
does it affect the most?
>> The babies. Yeah, of course.
>> Yeah. Because their kidneys aren't fully
developed. Their livers aren't fully
developed. It's affecting children. I
didn't even know that there was
radioactive contaminants in our water. I
didn't know that either. This came up
positive on all the tests for water
tests. And of course, not to mention
parasites,
viruses,
bacteria.
I mean, there's so many things. But
here's the good news. And now if people
want to use what I use, you can go find
your own. But um I use this is this
one's made in America. It's it's a
website called mypurewater.com.
And if you want discount codes, I have a
discount code if they want. It's
uprising 144K. But I'll show you an
example because it also removes all the
microplastics,
right? And all the fluoride. It removes
everything. There's nothing this can't
remove where other water filters can't
do that. Now, I'll give you one example.
If we look I here you know forever
chemicals
>> PFAS PFOA PFOS these kind of chemicals
>> this is how this is how much was in the
water
>> and this is after carbon distillation
look zero it takes everything
>> that I mean it just removes everything
now a lot of people are worried about
the whole minerals I was surprised to
find in my research there's a difference
between organic and inorganic minerals
not all the minerals in water are good
for you this is important to note
You know, and the magic minerals. I
mean, I'm getting my minerals now from
another product, too, if people are
interested, too. And you probably use a
chilleit. You heard of chilleit?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Yeah. And I found a way to use hydrogen
with it. So, what what I do is I take a
little cup and I pour the hydrogen water
from the hydroix because it's stable,
right? With a tablet, the hydrogen
escapes in like one minute, you know?
>> Yeah.
>> With the Hydroix, it takes an hour. So,
it's way more stable. And you want it
stable because you want it bioavailable.
This is important. So, I pour the
hydrogen water. And by the way, please
don't do this with the Browns gas water
because I've seen some pretty bad things
happen with that. I'm just not a fan of
those machines with chemicals. Um, but I
pour the hydrogen water and it's
dissolving the minerals from the
chiligit with the hydrogen. And then
I'll get a big cup, pour it full of
hydrogen, and then I'll pour the the
minerals in there. And I've noticed that
the hydrogen works synergistically with
the minerals.
Yeah. Yeah.
>> You know, and I think people forget that
these things are made in the stars.
They're made by hydrogen. In fact, so if
I give you an example, do you even know
where gold is made? I know you probably
know. Most people don't, but do you
remember where gold is made?
>> Uh, no.
>> Did you know it's made in the stars? In
supernovas, dying stars. Gold is made
there.
>> Well, everything comes from the stars.
>> There you go. And where's platinum made?
and where silver made and where are all
these metals or minerals? They're all
made in the stars.
>> You know, they have a relationship with
hydrogen.
>> People don't to me hydrogen is is like
the greatest like um piece of
construction
for everything. I mean, it's it's it's a
part of everything. And so, it's also
what I call the great balancer. I've
seen it bring a lot of balance to the
body. I noticed this when I was looking
at studies because I've done a lot of
research on this obviously and if you
had for example too much glutathione or
too little glutathione all these
different patients when they give them
hydrogen the ones that have too much it
brings it to healthy levels. The one
that are too low brings it up to healthy
levels. It's the great balancer
>> balancer
>> you know and that's a really big deal.
That's the reason that hydrogen the
scientists discovered that it appears to
be a selective antioxidant. It's not
just an antioxidant. It's selective,
which means that it can bring that
balance where, like, for example,
vitamin C, as much as I love it, it will
antioxidize indiscriminately.
That's different than something that
does it selectively,
which is a really big deal because you
do want some oxidation, some oxygen,
right? You do want some. But for those
who don't know, and I don't know if you
if you if I ever told you about this,
Santos, did you know that when you go
deep sea diving, anything below 60 feet,
they have to change the tanks of what
you're breathing, they have to remove
almost all the oxygen.
Did you know that?
>> You'd think the reverse, wouldn't you?
>> You would. But you know why? Most people
don't know this. Oxygen is actually
toxic.
oxidization,
>> right?
>> Oxygen oxidizes.
>> It doesn't mean that we don't need
oxygen.
>> It means that you want to balance it out
because some people like to do where
they supplement oxygen. And if you
supplement oxygen too much, literally
just after three days, if you're using
it regularly, your body will literally
begin to make less red blood cells
because it's thinking to itself, we got
so much oxygen, I don't need this many
red blood cells.
But people don't realize, if you really
look at a pro alete, somebody who has a
trainer that's a professional, they
actually do the opposite. They limit the
oxygen. In fact, they do like high
altitude training, they do less oxygen
because that gets the body to produce
more red blood cells and then you can
supplement it once in a while, but you
can't do it all the time. Oxygen is very
different. You don't want to be using it
excessively. And in the deep sea diving,
they remove, like I said, they remove
like 90% of or more of the hydrogen in
the tank or oxygen in the tank. So, they
leave just a sliver of oxygen, but what
do they fill it up with? Hydrogen and
helium.
Those are the two gases that you
primarily breathe in when you're in deep
sea diving. Because if made correctly,
because this is the other problem in in
this world, if you make hydrogen
correctly, it's the most pure. And
that's why I call it I call it the
ascension molecule because hydrogen
ascends. It's like a balloon. It
ascends. Oxygen doesn't. Oxygen actually
drops to the ground like a dead person.
Oxidation.
>> So these are all like the secrets of the
universe. And even the secrets to health
and understanding them. And like I said,
it's literally doing the impossible
with like certain patients or even
doctors which I want to interview. In
fact, if you ever want to do an
interview with him, too, um we could all
come on maybe and he can share, you
know, his testimony because this guy is
just like, "This is nuts.
It's doing so much more for him that he
could than he could ever achieve with
any pharmaceutical or anything." And
it's so basic. Clean water and clean
hydrogen. It's basic. And now, now
granted, done correctly. That's been my
biggest gripe is that I think personally
I've noticed, Santos, and you probably
know this too. I've noticed a lot of
corruption in the world of obviously the
world of pharmaceuticals.
Um, we've seen it in medicine. We've
seen it in government. And it sands me
to the core that I've seen so much of it
in the world of hydrogen. It's it's
terrible. And they and they hate me
because I'm trying to bring the truth.
So, I have to be really cautious about
how I speak now because they attack me
so much it's unbelievable, you know. And
I don't understand that. I'm like, don't
you want people to get better? But, you
know, and even in the world of
supplements, you have to be cautious,
too. And I found that out because
there's a company that tried to recruit
me, multiple companies.
And when I saw how they were making
their supplements, I was like, "Guys,
how come you don't use this method
that's better?" And they said, "Because
it's more expensive." And I said, "Well,
so what? Don't you want the best for
people?" And they said, "Yeah, but then
we make less profit." And I'm like, "Are
you guys not in business to try to help
people, brother? They don't I hate to
say it but every the majority
of supplements and I'm not naming all of
them because there are some things that
I use but very little um most of them
are are um in my opinion pretty corrupt
because when they see money it's like
vultures just everybody goes I mean look
how many supplements are out there. Can
you imagine if you took every single
supplement there is? You'd probably
destroy your kidneys.
You know, it's too much. And the real
magic, um, this is part of my protocol
is I call it God's ways because I want
to use the food in a certain way. You
know, clean my water. I clean my water
the same way that God created it, which
is the way that mother nature does it. I
don't know if we've ever talked about
how mother nature does clean water. It's
a it's an important thing because clean
water is pivotal. In fact, um I don't
know if I ever share this with you. Did
we ever talk Did we ever talk much about
my NDE? I think we talked a little bit
about it.
>> Yeah, that's that's when you first
contacted me. Remember?
>> Yeah, I think so.
>> Eight years ago, man. You told me that
story
>> at the river.
>> Yep, I did tell you about that. And one
of the things that was taught to me,
there was so much, but one of them I
remember the Almighty telling me and I
thought it was kind of weird. He was
telling me certain rules that we should
live by. And I was thinking like why
would you tell me? I'm a nobody. You
know, like you should be telling
somebody with power. Um and he the first
rule he said is don't ever do anything
that harms the air or the water. That's
the first rule. So if you're going to
take an action and that action hurts the
air, the water, then you shouldn't be
allowed to do it according to him. That
should be your number one like basic
rule for humanity. That's how important
clean air and clean water is to the
human body. and I utilize that knowledge
to create protocols that I've created
for my health, you know. So, it's it's
really important. And you know what's
ironic? Jesus talked about it in the
Bible, but I don't think people even
noticed it. Don't you remember when he
was talking to Nicodemus, he said, "You
must be born again of water." And he
used the word spirit, but the word
spirit also means wind. So, air. So, you
must be born of air and water. The same
thing that the Almighty told me that we
should keep pure.
So it all it all lines up, man. It all
lines up. Air and water and and remember
that air is a gas.
Molecular hydrogen is a gas. Okay, this
is really important. And remember that
water is actually made up of two gases.
Ultimately, we're talking hydrogen and
oxygen. And that creates water, you
know. And as Jesus said to Nicodemus, he
said, "What is of the flesh is flesh.
What is of the spirit is spirit." And he
goes into you must be born again of
both. You know, so all these things are
important to understand. And um and like
I said this with this doctor just losing
his mind saying how can I be consuming
more carbs and yet my diabetes is
better. It's so crazy because he tried
you know a lot of people try the all the
whole carnivore diet thing and you know
you know I don't obviously it's not
about for me I'm not attacking anybody.
We just want the truth right? I tried
that diet a long time ago because I was
trying to get better. But the problem is
that I only got worse actually. And I
just recently took on a client who she
did the carnivore thing too. It made her
feel better for about a month and then
things got worse for her and she didn't
do well with it either. It's it's the
long term. You need something
sustainable. And um and the real magic
uh some of the biggest research that's
happening from Japan right now that very
few people know about is the magic of
fiber.
fiber from fruits, vegetables, nuts,
seeds, beans, you know, mushrooms is
actually extremely magical to a level
that people don't understand. In fact,
now they're finding out that it's all
because we don't people don't consume
enough enough fiber, Santos. Um, I
looked at the numbers
and in America, there was a study done a
long time ago, decades ago, and when
they found out how much fiber the human
body requires, they literally said,
"We're not going to tell the people
because it's too much. nobody will ever
consume that amount of fiber um from
fruits and vegetables and whatnot. And
so what they did is they gave us a much
lower number. The number they actually
gave is the lowest minimum amount of
fiber that the human body requires. And
they told you, they didn't tell you it's
the minimum. They're saying, "Oh yeah,
here's your daily requirement." Guess
what percentage of Americans get the
minimum amount of fiber that the human
body requires. Any guesses?
probably about 3%.
>> Dude, you're absolutely right. It's 3%.
3%
>> of Americans get the minimum. That means
that like, have you heard of how many
people have issues in America with
hemorrhoids?
>> Oh, if it's anything like Australia,
it's 50% of the population,
>> dude. That or more. It It's It's so bad
that I actually got to hear these these
doctors that are also surgeons that
specialize on hemorrhoids. They said
that over 80% of people with
hemorrhoids, if they just increase their
fiber intake, they they're gone. They'll
be fine. Never need any medical
intervention. Fiber is so magical. So
magical. This is why I make these giant
smoothies and I and I use it with
hydrogen. That's part of the protocol,
you know. And so fiber is also very they
they discovered now, too. Hugely
anti-aging
and hugely anti-inflammatory. So I
combined that with super clean water and
super clean hydrogen. This is part of
the protocols, you know. And then of
course all the minerals and nutrients
like the chilleit and that type of
stuff. You give the body what it needs.
It's a it's pretty miraculous the things
it can do,
>> you know. So it's it's been a really
wild wild ride. And now finally there's
doctors that are coming out with data
proving that these techniques that I've
been, you know, using really work. I'm
trying to think of what else. Oh yeah,
there was a woman, this just happened
recently too. There was a woman who's
almost 100 years old, Santos. Multiple
heart conditions. She had like three or
four heart conditions. Her surgeon said,
"We can't do surgery on you. You're
almost a hundred years old." Like, "We
can't do this." They just said, "You
know, just count your blessings, live
day by day, and you're you're going to
die." That's what they told her. And her
daughter found me, and she's like, "Do
you think, you know, your hydrogen
protocol would help?" Now, it fixed my
heart. I had a heart condition myself,
right? never needed surgery like they
told me to. I'm technically supposed to
be dead. This old woman did my protocol.
I got an email from her doctor showing
and this is her cardiologist. All her
heart conditions gone. No surgery
needed. Dude, it was so unbelievable.
And they had to take her off her
pharmaceuticals that she had been on for
over 30 years
because everybody everything started
working again. You know, all these
things. It's like why doesn't well I
know why the world doesn't know about
this equipment. I appreciate you being
you know open to sharing it because most
of the industry is driven by money and
so people want to talk about that's why
all the Chinese products are so
prevalent because they make these
companies very big profits but you know
they the Japanese guy who created this
device was like no I'm creating this for
my daughter I need to save her life
which by the way she's almost 18 years
old now and she was she was supposed to
die at like three. So, she's an abs.
She's the only person in the world with
her condition that survived this long.
It's an absolute miracle. And one of
these days, I still never met the guy,
but I want to travel to Japan again. And
I got to give that guy a hug someday,
man. I mean, he he saved my life. I
actually believe I I saw this in my
meditation actually that her his
daughter, that was mine, by the way.
That was my computer.
Um, this guy's daughter, I believe,
chose to be born with the issues that
she had very bravely sacrificing her own
life so that her father could develop
this equipment that's touching so many
people's lives and helping so many
people, you know, and I think that that
to me was very touching and and he
really when he he was even offered to
say, "Hey, let's build this equipment in
China." He's like, "No, I don't want to
build it in China. everything in Japan.
It's the only machine in the world that
they lab test and certify every single
machine they make. No hydrogen company
in the world does this. I mean, these
guys are number one for a reason, you
know. And it's even named after Lords
France. If you remember Lord's France,
uh the healing holy waters of Lords. Uh
they literally named the machine the
Lord's hydroix premium from holy
hydrogen because they named it after
that place. And you've you know a lot of
people if you've ever seen the the
miracles that have happened from people
drinking that water and I think the
biggest thing that a lot of people just
don't know about is the spiritual
connection. You know you know what it
does for health but it's always kind of
made sense right because even people
like quote unquote like Jesus for
example or Yeshua you know the name
whatever name you want to deem on him he
didn't just go around preaching you know
giving wisdom he also did a lot of
healing. So spirituality and healing
seem to go hand in hand. And obviously
they're going after our health. They
don't go after your health for no
reason. It's not just about money. I
mean, yeah, great, they can make a ton
of money, but that's not the only
reason. They want us They want us sick,
>> you know. They want us weak. They want
us confused, you know, because it's
easier to control you and manipulate
you, you know, and so you have to sadly
you have to buy equipment to clean your
water. You have to try to buy organic as
much as possible. You know, I stay away
from all the processed food. You know,
stuff like this. You just have to do
your best in order to keep the temple
clean until the day comes because I
think three Atlas I don't know what you
think about that. I I actually What do
Let me ask Let me get your opinion on
because I'm curious on your opinion. Do
you have any opinions on three Atlas?
>> I I only see snippets. Uh I've been
watching them for a few months now, but
uh to me it could be a simulation pretty
much like a lot of other things. When
when this year began
remember we had drones, we had that
moss, that fog and then the noises
and everything like that. There was like
from January to sort of April there was
planes coming out of the falling out of
the sky. There was every week it was a
different thing and now it's this this
comet. So I I just uh I'll wait and see
before I comment. Let's see what
happens.
>> Well, I mean, if I were to give you my
opinion, I think it's a sign is what it
is. You see, think about it, Santos.
What year are we in?
>> 2025.
>> That's what you think, right?
>> Right.
>> None of us know what year it is, right?
And in my opinion, when you read certain
ancient scriptures like from the Hopi,
from the Aex Mayans, you know, even in
the Bible,
>> there are certain signs. In fact, the
Bible says like, "Be watchful of these
signs for this will mark the beginning
of my return or something like that."
>> And I think that this thing that's
coming through, everybody's trying to
figure out what it is. I think it's a
sign because if we didn't know what year
it is, you're never going to know what
to be watchful for.
>> This is God's calendar, right?
>> And so that's the sign. I think it's
showing us, Santos, that we have a
window of time. That's what I believe
it's showing us. This is the beginning
of it. And I think we have a window of
time that is roughly
between three to seven and a half years.
I think we're kind of roughly in this
window, you know. Um, so that's what I
think it really signifies. It may go by,
it may nothing may happen though I also
think it's going to have a effect on the
sun again, hydrogen and it's going to
have an effect on our electromagnetic
fields.
And remember what it says in these
ancient scriptures, all of them, by the
way, from the Bible to the Mayans, the
Aztecs, all it all talk about that they
affect the earth in certain ways where
there's going to be earthquakes. you
know, you're going to see certain
volcanic activity. I think these things
that it's going to affect, we're also
going to be affected. A big thing that I
don't think people realize is how the
sun is connected to us
and even the emotional state of humans.
I can give you an example of ancient
cultures that had this wisdom because
they used to worship the sun, right? And
if I give you an example, we know and I
don't I wish I had the book with I have
it downstairs if it's important. But the
hidden messages in water, Masarimoto,
right? The again, the Japanese. By the
way, they're masterful. Masterful at
water. When I spent time there, I didn't
realize if there is a modern day
Atlantis, it's the Japanese.
This is why they have so much knowledge
about hydrogen because hydrogen means
that which becomes water, right? And so
they are masterful. You should see the
things they do with water, Santos. In
fact, they did you know they have they
make all sorts of different types of
water for different things that they're
going to cook. So they'll use certain
water for making their rice, certain
water for making their tea, certain
water for making their miso soup,
different waters with different contents
of minerals, by the way. And and the
tastes, the flavors, unbelievable, man.
I It brings out the minerals bring out
certain flavors, you know, in foods and
different things that they're doing.
It's really pretty amazing the thing the
knowledge that they have including I
studied their diet too because look
everybody here here's something that I
realized I hope you enjoy this did you
know that you can look up the IQ of
countries were you aware of this
not probably what you're referring to
but I know that IQ tests are doable and
have been uh
has been a practice for many decades,
right?
>> Yes. So, what they what they've done is
you can go look at the IQ of a nation.
So, I looked up what are the smartest
countries in the world. So, I looked it
up. Japan,
Taiwan, Singapore, Korea, and China. All
Asian countries, by the way.
>> But here's the craziest part, man.
Here's the crazy part. I noticed a
correlation that ironically the smartest
country in the world also happens to
have the longest life expectancy of any
industrialized nation in the world.
Intelligence of course would breed
longevity because they're smart enough
to know how to eat. They're smart enough
to know not to pollute their water. Did
you know that the Japanese have an
ancient culture that in fact their
original, you know, religion or beliefs
come from something called Shinto?
And I didn't realize, brother, so here I
had my moment with God and he's telling
me, "Don't pollute the water. Don't
pollute the air, the wind." I didn't
know that the number one teaching in
Shinto is don't ever harm the water or
the air.
So it all started lining up, right? So
then I was like, I need to look and
study the Japanese diet because if they
live so long, I need to see what they're
doing. 70 to 80% of their diet's
vegetables.
So for anybody who doesn't believe in
vegetables,
>> I mean
>> there's there's a big war against
vegetables. Uh there's a lot of diet
gurus that uh don't like the vegetables.
What? Because of the um
>> sugar, carbohydrates or and the
oxalates.
Your body produces oxalates
>> and if you're not deficient in calcium,
oxalates don't bother you. And on top of
it, did you know that hydrogen, they did
studies and that it protects you from
oxalates.
>> I told you it's so protective. It's like
you need this because vegetables have
too many properties that are too
unbelievable. You know, certain
phytonutrients, the antioxidants, the
fiber, by the way, the fiber from
vegetables is so unique.
This is how one of the ways that I
created my protocol. I did it using data
from Japan. They discovered that we have
microscopic holes in our GI system and
that when if you eat vegetables first
thing in the morning, I usually I
actually start my day off with the
hydrogen water first
>> and then I make a smoothie that's
primarily vegetables because of this
study. They found that if you consume
vegetables first thing in the morning,
it helps regulate blood glucose all day
long for 24 hours.
That's bonkers. And
>> yeah, go ahead.
>> What vegetables?
>> Oh, any vegetable. So, I in my
smoothies, I'm putting things like kale,
spinach, chardred. I'm putting carrots
in my in my smoothie. I'm putting beets
in my smoothie. I'm putting celery. I
mean, I put a I put blueberries in
there, too. You know, I put I put these
different but mostly vegetables because,
to be quite honest with you, I don't
really want to sit down and have a big
giant salad for breakfast, you know? So,
I I make these smoothies with nutrients.
I use a powder from a company called
Purium. If people want, you know, to
know what I'm using, it's from a website
called Ishoppurium.com.
And discount code, they give you a big
discount with the code uprising144K,
the name of my channel. But the reason
that I use that product I have here, I
can show it to you, is because it's just
all food. It's not a supplement. It's
just food. It's just a bunch of
superfoods because we know that our
food's deficient. So, I add this
concentrated powder into this smoothie.
And then, guess what else I do? I add
minerals to it. And they did a study.
I've been doing this for years. They did
a study after three years after me doing
this. They did a study where they did
the same thing. It's like they copied my
protocol. They put the minerals in a
smoothie. Turns out that the minerals
work synergistically with the fiber
and it gives you ultimate not so much
nut so much absorption. So, fiber is key
for being able to absorb minerals and
nutrients.
And so when I did that, it the the
studies literally showed that people's
bones were rebuilding. They just
couldn't believe it. It it was never
supposed to be the results and that's
what they saw. And when I did blood
work, I don't know if I ever told you
this, I was doing blood work every 3 to
six months. There's a doctor, she's a
spe specialist of over 30 years. She
called me because she's like, "Did you
know that in over 30 years, I've never
seen one person have blood work like
yours?" And I was like, "Well, what did
you find?" She said, 'You not deficient
in anything.' She goes, "You know how
crazy that is? Everybody's deficient in
something." She goes, "You're deficient
in nothing." Also, because I know
hydrogen appears to help supercharge
absorption with the fibers. And she just
couldn't believe it. And then she didn't
know that I and I hate to bring this up
because people get really weird about
it, but I I personally don't eat meat,
which is, you know, people want to eat
it, that's fine, but I haven't eaten
meat for over a decade. And when she
asked me what my diet was, and I told
her, she's she couldn't believe it. She
goes, "That's impossible." She goes,
"That she goes that shouldn't be
possible." And I and I started thinking
about it, Santos. And you know what I
found? Because I was thinking to myself,
"If it's not supposed to be possible,
why does my body have all these
nutrients?" I found research, brother,
preliminary data that appears to show
that when you're using hydrogen, the way
that it affects your gut microbiome,
that you have certain bacteria that are
actually producing like roughly 40% of
my nutrients. That's crazy. I didn't
really realize that I'm getting my body
with all the fiber and all the hydrogen
and all the things that it really needs,
I'm producing a lot of my own nutrients.
That's why she couldn't wrap her head
around it because when we think about
health, we think of things really
two-dimensionally. Like when you look at
meat and you're like, "Look at all the
nutrients." It's like, I get it. And I'm
not saying that they don't have
nutrients or whatever, but they we just
think, "Oh, it has these nutrients. I
take in nutrients, therefore, I got the
nutrients." But you need to be able to
absorb them properly, you know? And if
your body produces them, that's even
better because like glutathione is
really magical. And remember they were
selling glutathione supplements forever
and they still do. But remember they
figured out that it's like you know
what's better than supplementing
glutathione? How about we give your body
the ingredients to make its own? Right?
>> Because that's better because people
don't understand that you have like
doors and you need the proper key and if
your body makes the key to unlock you
know these potentials that the body has.
It's better that way. That's why I
believe in God's ways or you know the
great spirit. I believe in his ways as
far as I want to eat food that is
nourished by the sun that's natural
that's not altered, you know, as organic
as possible, you know, with with no
chemicals. I just believe in the natural
things and and like I said, I'm a
purist, you know, I like things with
high purity. It's been uh it's created a
lot of success for me and my health, you
know, and I never thought that it would
help me grow spiritually, actually. And
it's man, have you heard of these kids,
the telepathy tapes? Have you heard of
this?
>> Yeah. Yeah, it's fascinating.
>> It's super fascinating because this is
part of what's coming with the age of
Aquarius Santos. This is the new wave,
the new creation, these new children,
you know, and I and it's even for me,
I've been in denial about it, too,
because I'm sure you probably have this,
too. I mean, I know I'm intuitive. And
since I've been cleaning the temple more
and using the hydrogen and I've put my
body through a seven-year cycle, which
is what Jesus taught in this book, this
is how I learned a lot about it was
through this book. And um and it's
helped me be more intuitive. In fact, I
get visions about how the human body
work. That's how I created all these
protocols, too. I've been following
these visions and it just makes complete
sense when everybody's arguing. They
don't know what the right way to eat or
live. You know, you know, back to the
Japanese, like when it comes to
understanding diet, oh my gosh, dude.
The things that they're doing, it's
whole other level. Like for example,
they eat foods of certain colors in
certain times of the year. So they're
following the stars and specific foods.
And then of course local food. They know
how to treat their soil. By the way,
these guys are not doing what America's
doing. They're not depleting their soil
and not knowing how to grow food. The
Japanese are master farmers. I think a
lot of people don't even know that
America hired Japanese to teach them how
to farm before World War II. Were you
aware of that?
>> No.
Masterful because the Japanese I mean
look at the way just look at the
workmanship of just what most people
know is like their samurai swords.
>> Oh yeah.
>> Second to none, man. Second to none.
>> Incomparable.
>> And they do that with everything. See,
people just know like, oh, they make
really great reliable cars, you know.
Okay, so they made a good Samurai sword.
No, they do way more than that.
>> You know, look at electronics. That's
one of the reasons that their hydrogen
machine is the best in the world. It has
to do with their masterful of
electronics. I found out, Santos, I
don't want to get too lost in the woods
on this because it's probably boring to
people, but it's important. When you see
machines making claims about how much
hydrogen they produce,
I found out that the majority of them
are either lying
or if their machines are truly producing
the levels of hydrogen that they're
claiming, it won't be doing it very
long.
>> Basically, because you have to turn up
the power, right? you turn up the
electricity, the output, and that
damages the metals that they're using
and the membranes that they're using,
certain components. And what I learned
was when they turn up the power, even if
you produce more hydrogen, when you try
to do that type of output, it creates
more impurities,
>> right?
>> Because it's destroying the metal,
destroying certain components. And then
you don't even know that after most
machines depending on the machine after
about roughly a year
>> they're not even producing almost any
hydrogen at all by the way.
>> Yeah.
>> And the hydroix which is really
fascinating when I learned when I
studied the engineering the hydroix is
different. The hydroix actually has a
special technology. Nobody in the world
does this. It uses a super low amount of
electricity
with super high-end metal. It uses the
best metal in the world. It's not
plated. It's not coated. It's not
stainless steel. Super because just like
the samurai swords, metallergy, the
science of metals is super important
when it comes to hydrogen. Okay. And
then they made a special membrane. So, a
lot of people don't know that the
majority machines using these membranes,
if you try to ask them what it who makes
their membrane, they're going to try to
hide that information like those little
bottles, those hydrogen bottles and
stuff because most of them come from the
company DuPont, the chemical company. So
the Japanese had tested these membranes
and they didn't like what they were
seeing. So they developed their own.
They're the only company in the world
they developed their own membrane,
right, for purity reasons. And so the
membrane, the best membrane that they
made and it's way better than any other
membrane that exists in the world right
now of hydrogen and the best metal with
low amounts of electricity.
The machine is making exactly
therapeutic amounts for people who are
trying to look at these outrageous
numbers. The number one university in
the world, actually university hospitals
in Japan that are using hydrogen
medically, they use for inhalation about
130 milliliters per minute.
And that's literally exactly what the
Hydroix makes.
>> Uh, run that by me again. Uh, every day.
Is that daily?
>> Well, what it is, it's not that it's
daily or not daily. What it is is it's
the output of the hydrogen gas
inhalation. So you that way you know how
much you're getting
>> and the number that it's putting out is
the number that is used medically. The
problem is people are literally claiming
that they're making 600 milliliters and
800 milliliters and these huge
outrageous numbers. By the way, too much
hydrogen could displace your oxygen
also. So, it's important to have healthy
levels. And the Japanese figured out
what that level is. And they chose also
to make that level because I even called
and asked them. I said, "Can you guys
make your machines put higher output?"
They said, "Well, if we turn up the
power, it creates more impurities." They
said, "We prefer the purity." So, it's
all about balance. Like the samurai
sword doesn't need to be huge. You want
it to be a certain size, but you want it
to be light, but you want it to be
sharp. You know, it's about precision.
It's not just about bigger, bigger, more
more. At some point, life is all about
balance. I'm sure you know.
>> You know, even drinking water, you never
want to drink over a gallon in one hour.
It's actually not good for you.
>> Oh, you can you can liquefy your organs
by doing that and die.
>> You can Yeah, you can die from drinking
too much water at one moment.
I I I know of an incident where a guy
was did that and he liquefied uh I
forget which organ
um and he just had a seizure and died.
>> Yeah, it's very dangerous. And so that's
why you really have to know how to
follow the levels and the purity, but
you get it right. And I show protocols
on my video 337.
I recommend for people to watch 388. And
if they get a machine, the machine is at
the official machine for the official
site is called holyhydrogen.com. Do you
actually do you have a discount code? I
don't remember.
>> Yeah, of course. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, do you want to give it to the
people or
>> Oh, well, I'm going to put it in the
description. I'm also I'm glad you me
mentioned Furion because I've been with
them for about three years and
transformed my life. Absolutely. The
berries, the dark berry, the super
green, the amino acids.
So, I'll put I'll put those in the in in
the chat for everyone.
>> Yeah. What I like about them is that
they also are all about purity. And I
don't use a lot of products, but
Purium's one of them, which is about
purity. Ironically, the one the machine
that cleans my water is from a site
called my pure water.com, right? And
then, ironically, holy hydrogen, the
word holy means to be pure.
So, it's it's the cleanest hydrogen I've
ever seen. And uh so, yeah, it's very
interesting. In fact, this this might be
interesting to you, too. Um, because
people are always asking me, "Do you
ever find any other equipment that's
also good about hydrogen?" I found
another one. It's a piece of equipment
also from Japan, but the equipment is
like $32,000, Santos,
which is not as accessible for most of
us. Um, but you're not going to believe
this either. They compared the Lord's
Hydroxix from Holy Hydrogen to that
$32,000 machine, and the Hydroix
outperformed it for a fraction of the
price. And it made the water in the
inhalation. The other one only does
inhalation.
So it that was a really big deal. Um the
thing's a masterpiece as you as you well
know.
>> Just one thing there. Can I ask you a
question? So no one knows
it's a secret what metals they're using
because I've I've got my hydroix just
around the corner here. Right.
>> I can I can tell you what they're using.
>> Yeah. But okay, but before you do, I
look that I look at that metal and it's
an alloy for sure. And I'm thinking,
I've never seen anything like that. It
looks like plastic, doesn't it?
>> Yeah. What they did, so here's another
thing I learned about their metals. One,
it's pure grade titanium
and platinum, by the way. And but it's
pure in the sense that all the other
machines that use those metals, they
plate them. So, it's plated or coated
metal. It's not pure.
And the process of being able to make it
apparently is extremely difficult. There
is only one company in the world that
can do it and it's a Japanese company. A
lot of people don't know that the
Japanese are masterful with metals.
>> Yeah.
>> In fact, America tried to buy Coobe
Steel, the Japanese metal company, which
by the way, Coobe Steel is the one that
has a hand in producing the hydroix. In
fact, did you know that Toyota got
involved to help make it? They got the
best engineers on hydrogen. Yeah.
Toyota, Yamaha, Coobe Steel, and
G-Shock. G-Shock, the watch company.
Because what the machine is doing is
something that no machine in the world's
ever done. It's utilizing, like I said,
that really low amount of electricity.
And so, what that allows it to do is
instead of the components falling apart,
you can make hydrogen day in and day out
for years and years and years and years.
In fact, it was tested after 7 years of
making hydrogen and it was still making
like 97 to 98% of the hydrogen it was
making compared to when it was new. No
machine can do that. The only machine
that that could could maybe do that is
that other $32,000 Japanese machine. So,
people don't even know that when they're
using these hydrogen machines that after
they use them for, you know, 6 months or
a year or whatever, it appears that
they're probably not even making any
hydrogen. and you don't even know it
because you don't you can't test it
because the equipment that is required
to test it's actually very expensive,
>> right?
>> So, a lot of people they think they're
getting hydrogen and they're not. In
fact, there was a guy I don't think he
knows hydrogen very well if you've ever
heard of Gary Brea, but he was promoting
these hydrogen bottles and he quit
because he realized that after six
months they're not making any hydrogen
anymore,
>> you know, and and that goes for the
entire industry pretty much most of
everybody. So they're they're not being
either honest or upfront with people or
they just really don't understand
engineering because again the Japanese
thought about this but most people never
they never thought about it you know so
it's been very it's been a very
interesting journey but the most
exciting part is what it does for the
human body you know as far as our
health. I worked with a lot of people
too with a lot of gut issues, Crohn's
disease, ciliac disease, IBS, leaky gut.
And that's really important because the
food that we're eating is just
destroying a lot of people's guts and um
and I mean our GI system is responsible
for almost 80% of our immune system.
And I actually believe we're about to be
hit with another
um potential stuff that's going to be
coming out. Um I don't know if you heard
about the accident that happened in
Florida. They were doing experiments on
monkeys with their with their um I'm not
going to say it to get any channel your
channel in trouble, but you know they're
they're messing around with um certain
things that could make us potentially
sick, right? And they they were
transporting all these monkeys. Crashed.
The vehicle crashed and all these
monkeys escaped. This just happened like
three four days ago, man.
>> Yeah. I heard
>> you heard about it.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So it's like now what? Right.
What's going to happen now? So this is
why you have to protect yourself and
keep all your nutrient levels, you know,
from your vitamin D, your vitamin C,
your B12, everything, every nutrient,
every mineral. Keep your hydrogen intake
high and stay hydrated because these are
the things that will help you fight off
disease if if you are come in contact
with it,
>> you know,
um just, you know, improve your odds is
is important because this is the time to
survive. I believe that,
like I said, I believe that that three
eye atlas is actually a sign for what's
about to come. And you better be ready.
And you got to prepare the body. When I
say prepare the body, you have to be
strong and healthy because this they're
going after the temple of God. They're
going after the temple, the body. It's
pretty clear.
>> Yeah. Look, it's it's I think it's
becoming patently obvious even to the
sheep all unaware
with the masses. They're starting to see
that signs are appearing and everything
is every day there's new news and new
stuff, but they see them as signs. They
don't see them as anything else other
than signs that something's about to
happen. And that's that's uh
incentivating. It's very very inspiring
because usually those people were like
armchair
uh deniers of everything. You know,
everything's you're wrong. And no,
people are questioning the government
now. And even the government's
questioning itself. I think everything
is
>> y
>> every everything is examining and and
scrutinizing everything and I think
we're coming to a point where critical
mass will just with all this great
technology we've got
>> oh brother and you know I haven't even
told you um I had some visions this was
a while back I talked about it on some
other platforms but if I haven't told
you is about how to prepare for not just
the antichrist but the mark of the beast
because when the scripture says says the
majority are going to fall for it. I
kind of thought to myself like really
the majority like really after
everything that's happened, but then
when I was given the vision of what
they're going to offer you, oh dude, it
all became very clear. So, and it's and
once I looked in scripture, it's
actually there, but not one person ever
noticed. I'm going to share it with you.
Everybody knows that the scripture says
that without the market, you won't be
able to buy, sell, or trade, right?
>> Y
>> So, we know that it has to do with
money, right? We get that. I think the
majority of people know that. The part
that they don't realize is that it also
has to do with health.
So what they're going to do is they're
going to offer you this technology
that offers they're going to put money
on the chip. So they're going to give
you an allowance.
>> So who's going to say no to free money,
right? That's the first thing. And
second, it's going to have a health
component to it where they're going to
say this thing is detecting and reading
your body all the time. And if it sees a
problem, the chip will literally send
signals to repair the problem before it
ever even begins. Kind of like uh have
you heard of uh what's Elon Musk's uh
chip company or whatever,
>> darling? No. Um
uh yeah,
>> somebody out there knows. Is there
anybody making comments?
>> It'll definitely if you spell it
backwards, it'll have something evil
about. In fact, I was looking at the
chats and someone was saying that um the
uh we'll we'll we'll do this. We'll do
some of these questions. It's good to
see people so active. I I can't believe
it. Mr. Astro Theology is really really
uh people are still um subscribed.
Obviously, I lost 3,000 subscribers, but
um someone said that uh backwards I saw
the uh three eye atlas backwards meaning
father diamond. Anyway,
>> interesting.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, I was Oh, I was talking about
Neurolink. So Neurolink that
>> so Neurolink what what it does is it
sends a signal for example to the retina
if you have if your eyes don't work and
then you restore your eyesight again
>> this thing that they're going to put in
you will be able to restore your health
if you have health problems now why do
you think if they make you sick and
you're just like so tired of being sick
and now they're going to offer you money
and health dude who says no to that
right
>> yeah Of course, people are going to say
yes to and it's going to be free. So,
you're going to have and then here's my
theory. I'm going to tell you my theory,
Santos. I'm going to disclose it here. I
think that if we have a solar flare
because you know we had the Carrington
event back in the 1800s, right? You
remember that?
>> Yep.
>> It would literally wipe out all
electronics.
>> We are due for another one. Now, here's
the crazy part. What if we get the chip
and this thing's in you and then you get
a Carrington type event where it
destroys electronics? Like, how do you
think that would affect your health with
this thing in you?
>> I don't think it's good, man.
>> No.
>> And so, when the time comes, according
to scripture, it's going to be peace on
earth. It's going to be all wonderful.
That's according to the to the
scriptures.
>> Yes.
>> And we're going to have to be patient.
We're going to have to see how it all
plays out. can't just jump on it right
away. And it's going to be tough because
you won't have access to money just like
everybody else. It's going to be really
tough, but I think that this is
important. And I actually really believe
that hydrogen plays a huge component
into all this. And so, you know, the
whole thing is kind of wild, but you
know, I hope that this helps people
understand about what's what's really
about to come because if you don't know
what's coming, you ain't going to be
ready for it. And if you're not ready
for it, you're you're gonna, you know,
fail. You ain't going to make it, you
know, and the majority won't make it. I
mean, that's according to the writings.
And that's okay, you know. I mean, it's
all written in the stars. But if we can
help our brothers and sisters, you know,
with knowledge, what does it say in the
ancient scripture? My people fail or or
for a lack of knowledge or fall due to a
lack of knowledge, you know, we got to
have wisdom. And this is why I'm so
thankful for for the Japanese because
they're they're one of the one of the
only societies I've ever seen that put
something above money and that's honor.
Very honorable people. They they value
honor so much that they will literally
end their life.
>> Now, this was back in the day, of
course, but if they would dishonor their
families and themselves, you know, it's
it's a big deal to them. And I'm very
very um honored to be able to spend time
there. I'm going to go back there. By
the way, um I also discovered some
interesting uh techniques. These are all
my own stuff but and because of hydrogen
that water is actually a doorway.
And when I say water's a door, I'll give
you an example. Do you remember again
like again people don't like to hear
this but here we go. Um so like for
example ancient scripture with Jesus,
right? Remember that he went into the
water when he got baptized and remember
what the scripture says. It says and the
heavens opened up
when he went through the water because
he knew how to activate it. I don't
think people know how to activate it.
I've been all this came to me in these
meditations. So I've been preparing my
body and myself for doing my own
spiritual journey and my own thing, you
know, and so the heavens opened up and
then what did it say? The Holy Spirit
entered him at that moment. That means
that the Holy Spirit wasn't with him the
whole time. I know some people might not
like to hear that, but it entered him at
that moment. you know, and I really
believe that all the difficulties that
we're going through on on planet Earth,
um, you know, humans going through all
these difficult times, I think it's
actually going to be for our benefit in
the future because remember when you go
through difficult times, you know, it
really causes like growth,
you know, um, like a diamond under
pressure, you know, that's, you know,
you create, in fact, supernovas, that's
how the gold is created, you know, where
the pressure, you know, of the sun and
different temperatures and everything
else. The temperatures are a big one,
too. I found a place in Santos. One of
these days, you'll have to join me in
Japan. I found this place in the
mountains, man. They got beautiful hot
and cold springs, man. Right by a river.
The water is so unbelievable. And I get
I get the most messages when I use all
my hydrogen and I go into these ancient
hot springs, you know, waters from from
the mother earth. And man, I get
downloads like crazy. That's where all
this stuff comes from, you I don't
actually read anything really. All this
stuff just comes to me and um and it's,
you know, it's all about the spirit and
connecting to source because it has all
the wisdom, man. It's got all the info.
You know, there's a reason that the
scriptures say you must learn to walk
with spirit. Doesn't say you must learn
to walk with the flesh.
Spirit is eternal. You know,
>> and and wisdom comes from time. And as a
flesh being, you don't you don't live
very long. I mean, even if you make even
in a hundred years, we're still just
it's a drop in the bucket compared to
the spirit,
>> you know.
>> So, this whole thing this whole thing is
about to get exciting, man. And I'll
I'll definitely uh you know, keep you
updated, keep you posted. Oh, by the
way, there's another doctor. You were
asking about the some more doctor stuff.
>> Yep.
>> I'm I'm have to show the images. I got
this doctor who went to the Mayo Clinic
with a patient with a brain tumor. By
the way, I have the before and after
images and he used the machine from Holy
Hydrogen. Dude, the brain tumor is gone.
He show he sent me the images and this
doctor is like by the way he's a I'm not
going to give his name out just yet but
because he asked me not to but in the
future I'm going to. This guy's actually
a true hydrogen specialist by the way
and he he went to go look for the best
equipment and what did he find? He said
holy hydrogen is the best equipment
because it's the best there is. That
that's that's a you know big statement
from this particular guy too. So people
just for people who can't do all that
research and you know you're able to
help people with who do want to try the
best. So for you know whether they got
arthritis or blood pressure issues or
diabetes or cholesterol issues or heart
conditions or gut issues or you know all
sorts of stuff autoimmune issues. It's
it's pretty remarkable stuff. This
doctor's uh pretty blown away by the
technology and he's been utilizing it
with some other stuff that he does and
uh the results have been well he sent me
that one about the brain tumor. In fact,
I worked with a guy too. I I did a
little video with him on Instagram, a
guy who couldn't talk because his brain
was all screwed up. He had a he had
brain cancer and of course they radiated
him and it was terrible and and he
couldn't talk and I talked to his nurse
and then he got again he got the holy
hydrogen machine is inhaling it all the
time. Last time I talked to him, dude,
his speech was 80 to 90% improved. I
could totally understand what he was
saying. It was so unbelievable. Even the
doctors were like, "Man, what is this
thing?" Like, you know, there was a
person who had had a stroke, by the way.
And they brought they literally took the
hydroix into the hospital and hooked
them up because he was he was in a coma.
He woke up within six days and he had
been in a coma for months. They didn't
think he'd ever come out and the machine
appears to have pulled him out of a
coma. I mean, you know, I'm not making a
claim, but that's what happened. That's
what his wife told me. And so just just
crazy, man. Crazy stuff, you know. But
you do have to just remember you have to
take care of it. You got to keep it
clean and you got to do cleanings
because if you don't do that, the
hydrogen production will go down. So you
have to stay on top of maintenance, you
know. But the maintenance is easy. Um
they everything's exposed. That's why
you can see the metal.
>> That's why you can see membrane because
everything's exposed.
>> And they designed it that way because I
found the units that are not exposed,
they can grow mold in them. That's what
the Japanese discovered. That's why they
made everything visible. This is what I
mean. I learned everything about the
engineering of all machines. I know all
methods of hydrogen and this thing is a
masterpiece and it's actually
attainable. It's it's not 30 40 $50,000,
you know. So,
>> like I've got personal friends who are
saving saving up money just to get one,
you know? They're just dying to get one
and they just don't have the money. But,
I mean, when you think of it in the in
the whole scheme of things, two and a
half thousand, right?
If you go to a doctor for or dentist,
you know, couple of illings, it's
already 3,000. I mean,
>> two two $2 two,000.
It's a big hit. A lot of people can't
afford it, but if if you can I'm I'm
lucky that I was able to. You will be
blessed. You'll be blessed. As long as
you put good clean water in that machine
and keep it clean. You're supposed to
clean it with citric acid, right? Yeah,
every once in a while. Um, usually once
a month. I think I do mine every two
months or something because I use such
clean water, you know.
>> Me, too. I keep checking it and I I just
keep checking all underneath everything
and it just stays clean, man. Cuz I I
only put distilled water in it and then
remmineralize it. Put a couple of drops
of trace minerals I've got up there. I
think you can see them right there. That
that famous that famous brand
>> concentrate. Huh?
>> Concentrates. Is that the company for
the minerals?
>> Let me show you.
>> Yeah, because I'm big on mineral usage,
too. Minerals are so important. Like,
look at your shelves, man. You got a
nice little system there.
>> This is a laboratory.
>> Lab. Laboratory. That one?
>> Oh, yeah. That's the one. That's what I
use, too.
>> This stuff is great, man. Oh yeah, min
minerals are powerful, but when combined
with hydrogen, nobody realized that yet,
>> but I've I've already been doing when
you combine the hydrogen with the
minerals, they work synergistically
together. I noticed
>> you really want to absorb those
properly. And nanobubbles are super
important. So the new hydroix
um I don't I have the new one. I just
bought the new one because they've done
all these updates and they're making
better nanobubbles than they've ever
made before. In fact, they're making
something called sticky hydrogen. Nobody
has ever done anything like this before.
>> Okay, I've got to get the new one
because I remember four years ago the
Hydroix was new that the one that I've
got
>> and um it was a new model and I wanted
the new model and you sent it to me.
Remember back in
>> Puerto Moros?
>> Yep. Oh, you were lucky to get that.
Apparently there in Mexico they don't
like to send stuff over there, you No,
I've had so much staff return.
>> There there's people um I believe
there's some people actually who resell
or sell the hydro fix now in in Mexico.
>> Yeah, that'll be good. you know, if if
people in Mexico want something, I'll
look at my phone and I've saved some of
their emails because I get people
requesting in Mexico all the time, you
know,
>> and uh so
>> very health consscious here.
>> But man, their sticky hydrogen brother,
they found that it improves the hydrogen
by like 33% maybe to 36. That's a big
improvement. It's not like five or 10,
it's almost 40%. And the sticky hydrogen
sticks to things. And it was actually
throwing off the equipment to measure
the hydrogen because it was measuring
higher than it should. It was actually
measuring higher than full saturation,
which in the world of science should be
impossible.
>> When you say sticky, you talking like
visos or something like that? It's
almost like um I would almost think
about it like magnetic,
>> you know, and it and it was sticking to
everything, which makes it when it goes
in you, you want it to get you want it
bioavailable. You want it sticking on
everything like an adhesive, you know,
instead of it being the kind of hydrogen
that escapes so fast. You don't want
stuff that escapes fast. You want stuff
that's stable, super good nanobubbles
sticking to things because you want the
bioavailability
of the hydrogen, you know?
um both again spiritually but also
physically for your health. It's it's
the combination. You know, I've even
created some protocols for the eyes.
I've had people with macular
degeneration, glaucoma,
um you know, all sorts of different eye
conditions. Um the dimensions in the
Alzheimer's are actually pretty shocking
um for people with Alzheimer's and
dementia. Um
cognitively it's it's it's just such a
big deal. There was a woman, her
daughter or I'm sorry, this daughter of
this woman, the older woman had
dementia. She didn't even recognize her
own daughter anymore. And she did the
protocol. Dude, she started recognizing
her own daughter. I have before and
after pictures. You can see the It was
funny because when she had the dementia,
her eyes look black. They just look
black just like Joe Biden's did, you
know? They're just black, you know? And
uh and then you can see after she's
using the hydrogen, the daughter was
taking pictures, dude. You can see her
face transform. I mean, it was
unbelievable. I posted the video. I
can't remember what number it is. Um, I
think it was 137 or 138, but it's it's
been really exciting. I I think that the
future of understanding water and
hydrogen is going to be really big. And
I think the most of it's going to come
out of Japan as it, you know, as it has
been. The Japanese are light years ahead
of everybody on this technology.
>> And the Chinese, well, I mean, I got
friends that are Chinese and all that.
It's not the people, it's their
government that I just I don't trust
their government. I don't like their
their hydrogen machines. Um, people are
even trying to hide the fact companies
are trying to hide the fact that their
machines are from China. So, they try to
get the parts shipped to like Canada or
Taiwan or even Korea because they don't
want to say that they're made in China
even though they're just using Chinese
parts, you know? So, people don't want
you to know the truth and that that
always bugs me. It's like just tell me
the truth and let me make an informed
decision, you know? Um, so that's been
pretty wild, too.
Yeah. Hey, Greg. I do have people who
want to ask questions. So, hey guys. Um,
while we have Greg and I've got the
energy. It's quite late. It's nearly 10
o'clock, but what time is it for you?
>> Um, it is almost 8. That's okay. I'll
answer some questions real quick and
then if you got to go, we can always do
do more some other time.
>> No. Well, I'm not in any hurry. I got
plenty of energy. talking to people like
you just inspire me and I forget that
I'm tired. So, um if anyone one wants to
do a uh pop a question in, put it in all
caps
and fire away. Okay. So, I'm going to
look for some questions. Um
>> real quick, look for a question. I want
to grab one something real quick.
>> Yeah, go for it. I have a book from this
is coincidence theorist and I like and I
like that instead of conspiracy theorist
>> pretty good eh coincidence theorist I
have a book from uh 1931
on how to correct your eyesight back to
how to take care of glow comma and so
much more okay well that's not
necessarily a questions
in all caps Perhaps let me scroll up
because I did see some some questions.
Um,
but none nonetheless they will come in.
Uh, concentrate. No, that's not a
question. God, there's a lot of comments
here. I I didn't expect this, but there
you go.
>> Hold on. Keep looking.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
here. We can share some stuff.
>> Okay, I see. Thanks, Nick. Nick uh put
the channel in. Um
and and and guys, um I put um Mr. Astro
Theology, the new channel up there.
Well, you you're already on it, but um
I'm going to put my my links. Greg has
his links on all of his videos and I've
got my links for Purium and for the
hydrogen machine and but if you go to my
website and you go to the shop tab all
of the things that I have there
I
they are things that I've that I've
tested only and they work. Um I have
many companies
wanting me to
promote their stuff. They send me some
samples. I don't like it and I don't put
them up there. So, anything on my um
Universal Truth School channel
um will will be good stuff, right? So,
all right.
>> Oh, you find a question yet?
>> Yeah. Which book was Hydrogen Man
showing to us? So, what was that book? I
I wanted to know that too about
>> this. This is very interesting. It's
called the Essene Gospel of Peace.
>> Right. There you go. That answers that
question.
>> Now, there's a reason if if I don't know
if I guess people can read if they want,
but just so you understand what this
book really is about. The man who wrote
it,
his father was translating, he was a
famous translator and he was translating
books from the hidden archives of the
Vatican. Okay. Now, I'm a just so people
understand my personality. I'm a very
big skeptic. I need really good data and
I like to look at data from many points
in every different perspective because I
have to be right when I'm looking for
the truth. You know, I don't want to
just be dillydally.
This book when I first started reading
it I was extremely skeptical and
thinking this is a bunch of nonsense
because this guy's father who was a
translator he followed in his footsteps
and he became a translator and he
translated a lot of books from the
hidden archives of the Vatican
that he did it in secrecy and on his
deathbed he gave him to this woman that
he used to work with and said go ahead
and release it when I die and never let
them charge more than a dollar. see the
price here
so that everybody
>> so everybody could have access to it,
right? But here's the here's the key,
Santos. There's a couple of really key
points. Remember that in ancient
scripture, Jesus never said, and this is
really weird, but he never said, "God be
with you." Did you ever notice that?
>> He He didn't say what?
>> God be with you.
>> And you He never said that.
>> No.
>> No. Right. What what did Jesus actually
say?
>> Peace be with you.
>> Why? Because peace is what leads you to
God.
>> Okay. And then what did the title say?
Is seeing gospel of peace.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And what is he writing on here in
this picture? Stone tablet. Right.
>> Right.
>> Okay. Now, here's the crazy part though.
So, you start looking at these ancient
scriptures that this guy was
translating. And by the way, this stuff
is so beautiful and so poetic, all these
ancient scriptures,
but I was such a skeptic about this
Santos. But I'm going to tell you why I
believe a lot of what's in this book.
Because when I went to the other side
and I got to meet the Almighty, which I
know is a bold statement and a lot of,
you know, I don't expect anybody to
believe me because I probably wouldn't
believe me, right? When I was there, it
was unlike anything that I've ever heard
anybody talk about. I've never heard
anybody's NDE say what I saw. I've never
heard anybody say or describe the other
side, I hate to say it, but correctly.
And I felt really alone in it, right? I
was thinking, geez, why did why why did
I have this experience that nobody else
has ever had? And brother, when I read
the last four pages of this book, in
fact, this is one of the images I saw
this. I don't know who drew this, but
see how there's a being with a light
over their head, like a crown.
>> Yeah.
>> This is where I was. I was here and
there was a being with me just like this
and there's a giant circle of all these
beings and and this is just a little bit
of what I experienced. But in these last
four pages,
Jesus describes
the other side and brother absolutely
perfect and correct as far as everything
that I saw and experienced.
>> It was it was so precise. That's what
made me trust it. It's the only book
that's ever described the other side
correctly as far as what I saw, you
know. So, that really boggled my mind.
And I learned, this is how I learned
when I was on the other side. This is
why I learned about water being a door.
The water is the door. And by the way,
the water is the door for the flesh,
but the stars
are doors, too. That's why they call
them star gates. Gates are doors. Okay?
And I actually traveled through those
gates. I went through the star and the
star, one thing that I've learned is
that all the stars in the heavens are
connected. You just can't see that
they're connected. They're all
connected. They're like branches of a
tree.
>> And so when you go through one, it
shoots you to another star. And you
travel the stars and it leads if you
know the way, which I didn't. I was so
lost on the other side. It was that it
what was actually guiding me actually
taking me my guide was a being of light
that I encountered there. They were
taking me everywhere until eventually I
they took me to a place where I got to
meet the almighty and Jesus talks about
the Almighty in this book and describes
them perfectly. Nobody's ever described
them perfectly that I've ever met. And
so this was it was really fascinating
and and the truth is that we're all
meant to be able to do this. This is not
for any but one person or someone who's
special. No, no. We all have access to
him. And what I want to do in the future
is I am going to disclose eventually how
it's done so that everybody can do it.
But there are certain things that you
have to do including this is something I
learned in this book too. Jesus talked
about how to prep the body.
And by the way, Jesus tells you not to
eat meat in this book. He says that if
you eat death, you become it. And he
says it like it rots inside of you. You
know,
>> say what?
>> Putrifies.
>> That's right. Yeah.
And that's and that's what gives people
hemorrhoids which I will never have and
never have had one little bitty one.
>> And and I understand, you know, yeah, I
I understand um some people will not
agree and that's okay. You know, I'm not
going to judge it. I'm not gonna be mad
about it. I'm just telling you what he
said,
>> right? And I and I followed a lot of the
ways here to also transform my health. I
learned a lot from reading because the
the Jesus in this book is very kind of
different than the one from the Bible.
Um in this one he shows you how to live.
>> Yeah.
>> He teaches you how to eat in order to
heal.
>> You know
>> you have you have to remember Greg and
all the listeners please that the Bible
that we have it's a good book. It's a
great book. But
the people who chose which books were
went in and the thousands which were
excluded
were Roman Catholic senators and elite
families, Constantine the Great from the
Julio
Claudian
Julio Claudian uh dynasties.
They they chose those four gospels. And
yet there are many many many many
gospels. So when people say, "Oh, yeah,
but your views about Jesus and the
historicity of Jesus and whatnot and and
that he's an archetype and it's in you
and that you're Jesus and that you are
God and if you don't compare yourself
with God, you will never know God." Like
Jordana Brun said, "Well, that's because
I read these gospels. I haven't read
that one that you've got in your hand,
but I read the Gospel of Thomas uh uh
Barnabas and hundreds of gospels.
>> You're going to love this, too. And then
notice here it's, of course, it says
Jesus's words, "Peace be with you."
>> And and this is actually another image I
saw on the other side. In fact, I
learned how to open up Jacob's ladder,
brother.
>> I know the technique now. And then here
again, the being with the light on his
head that guides you. There's always a
guide because I don't know the way when
I'm there. This being of light knows the
way. And when I say that the heavens are
vast, they're so massive you'd never
know your way around. It's too big. And
so you
>> I' I'd like to have you um on school. I
I teach every Thursdays 2 2:00 p.m.
Mexico Central Standard Time on school.
I'd like to invite you very very soon to
talk about how you know you you you do
the Jacob's ladder thing and things that
you can't say on these platforms. How
how would you like that?
>> Yeah, brother. Let's do that.
>> Okay.
>> Absolutely.
>> All right.
>> Yeah.
>> I I want to get to these questions
because bombed with questions here. Um
and I saw a really good one. Uh, where
do the Anunnaki fit into this narrative?
Well, I could answer that, but have a
go, brother.
>> You know,
I don't actually
the only thing that I would say about
the honor because I'm not really really
big on all that other than the fact that
there was probably a genetic component,
you know, as far as humans. So, like for
example, did you know that um did you
ever see the book? book. I'm trying to
remember what book it was. It was found
in the Dead Sea Scrolls
and it was a story about Noah.
And it was really quite fascinating
because Noah
was born of his mother when the mother
had never had
intercourse with her husband. Did you
Did you actually hear about this,
Santos?
>> Yep.
And in the Dead Sea Scrolls, when they
describe Noah, they describe his skin as
pink,
meaning they're they're describing a
Caucasian person. And this is the guy,
remember? That is I know I should be
doing my inhalation, too, actually.
>> No. Well, someone just asked me to show
them. Actually, I'll plug it in
>> so that can see it. Someone uh asked to
see the machine. So, let me do that.
And you can see the machine, the new one
on the official company's website,
holyhydrogen.com.
And the machine makes both the water and
the gas inhalation.
Reliable, last a long time. And the
water, believe it or not, a lot of
people seem to get this wrong. As far as
I can see, the water has more benefit
than even the inhalation.
All right, guys. So, it's got 30 minutes
on here, right? 30 minutes. And you wait
30 minutes for it to uh hydrate that uh
make molecular hydrogen. But you can see
you can see the little bubbles. Just
look at the little bubbles.
>> Yep.
>> And you see that's the metal there. It
looks like plastic, doesn't it?
>> Well, actually that that part
>> under it.
>> Yeah, it's under it. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. That is plastic. But
>> yeah, it is plastic.
>> The metal underneath looks just like
that. I mean, it's it looks weird.
>> So, you can see all this coming up. And
this is what I do, guys. So, what you
do,
>> you can literally inhale the gas
straight to your brain.
>> There's the little two uh nostril.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, you put that up your
nose
and you just have it there.
>> And you can do, you know, Santos, you
can do like breathing techniques with
the hydrogen tube, by the way, and it
definitely enhances your breathing
techniques. They uh they did there's a
medical clinic in Japan that used that
exact device and they did thermmo
imaging studies while doing the
inhalation
>> which
>> I mean there's so much there's so much
data and and proof about what that thing
does. It's it's just so beautiful. But
anyway, I don't I don't necessarily have
a lot to say about the Anunnaki thing to
be quite honest with you.
>> Yeah. Ne neither do I. I know that
there's a constellation in Aries
um and and there's a star system called
Anu.
>> Oh.
>> So, yeah. And so, um I would say that
these would be the the people who are
trying to keep us down now. And that's
just uh their um Middle Eastern name.
You know, in the Bible, they'd be called
Nephilim, right? Or whatever. So that
that's what
>> Okay, here's another one. Greg, how do
you fix eye floaters? And and another
question which is similar. Uh my 84 year
old dad has immaculate degeneration.
What can he do immediately? Thank you.
So try and answer that without uh giving
any medical advice.
>> Yeah. So basically, by the way, so the
Japanese discovered, and you're going to
love this too, Santos, that the way that
the sun affects the eyes
depends on how old you are. So they
found out that the sun is good for
younger kids because their eyes have
high levels of antioxidants.
It's actually good for the eyes. But
when you get older,
your level of antioxidants in the eyes
apparently has dropped so dramatically
that the sun can be damaging to your
eyes when you're older. So this is where
hydrogen comes in. You want to consume
the hydrogen regularly. Like my father
had glaucoma, by the way, and he just
used the hydrogen regularly and his
glaucoma went away. Um, I obviously
recommend using the cleanest hydrogen
and because some of it I would never put
in my eyes and also really clean water.
And you can even do protocols. Now,
please, please, please don't do this
with the wrong equipment because I don't
want anybody getting harmed. You have to
do it the right way. You can only use
carbon distilled water because if you
use other water and you put it in your
eyes, it can actually be it's a just a
bad idea. Don't do that.
And then go ahead.
>> Did you say carbon distilled?
>> Yeah. So basically when you distill your
water, you want to do a combination of
either you distill it and then there's
carbon at the end and it goes through
carbon also. So you do those two
modalities
>> or you prefilter the water which I also
do with reverse osmosis.
>> Then you take that water and you put it
through the distiller.
>> Yeah. Then because you have to do the
combination of both otherwise the water
doesn't come out perfect. And the only
reason is is because in nature when you
distill water the water rises up
thousands of feet into the air but in a
machine it can't do that. And there's
certain gases in the water like like
chlorine is a gas by the way you know
and so you have to filter it that way.
And once the water's clean and then you
you make hydrogen the proper way, which
I don't use any other equipment except
from the one from Holy Hydrogen for the
safety reason of it. And then when it's
super pure, you can get these little
cups. I don't know if you've ever seen
them. You can put them over your eyes
and tilt your head back and open your
eyes. You can let the hydrogen water
right on the eyes.
Only only if you're doing it the way
that I'm saying because otherwise, guys,
I'm telling you, please don't do it the
wrong way. I've seen people try to use
Browns gas like this. Please don't do
that. you're going to don't don't do it
the wrong way, please. It's you're going
to cause issues in my opinion. Um, so
that's one technique that you can do.
The inhalation like Santos is doing. So,
if you drink the water first on an empty
stomach and then you inhale afterwards,
it enhances the hydrogen and when you're
inhaling, it's also going into the eyes.
It's going into the eyes, the brain, the
sinuses, the lungs, and obviously into
the bloodstream. And then you can learn
more about my protocols and my
techniques on video 337 on my YouTube
channel. It's everything's for free on
my YouTube channel. You can go
subscribe, share the videos because it's
the only way the information is going to
get out. And my the name of my channel
and this is crazy Santos because I call
my channel uprising
144K. And what's one of the biggest
words that is going viral over the
internet? Uprising. Because they keep
saying there's an uprising. There's an
uprising. Yeah, this is an uprising of
the spirit, right? We must learn to walk
with spirit. Spirit holds the wisdom.
So, I want to help people rise up. And
the 144,000, so the uprising 144k comes
from the 12 tribes of 12,000, which are
the children of light. You know, we want
to bring forth the truth and we want
people to know what that is. So that way
it can hopefully benefit them and help
them in many ways from joy and happiness
to good health, you know, all these
things. And so that's what the channel
is all about and everything's there's
free so you can guys go check it out.
Hopefully that answered your question.
But I also highly recommend a very um
antioxidant rich diet um which is
obviously fruits, vegetables, nuts,
seeds, beans, mushrooms, but the
hydrogen water is pivotal and nutrients
are pivotal. So hopefully that answers
that question.
>> Okay. Uh so before buying the machine ID
need to have filtered water first to
use. Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> In my opinion, yes. Because what you're
doing is you're using water as a carrier
for the gas, right? So why would you
want to use dirty water if you're trying
to get yourself healthy? Um, and I think
people need to understand this too is by
nature, people don't realize that nature
is actually designed to carry gases and
liquids. So if I give you an example,
your blood is basically like water. And
every time you're inhaling, which right
now you're inhaling about 20 21% oxygen,
you're actually saturating or dissolving
a gas oxygen into your blood. That's why
when they do an oximter and they check
your oxygen saturation level, they're
measuring the gases within your blood.
So that's why when Santos is inhaling
hydrogen, it's helping saturate hydrogen
into his blood. And I did a test,
Santos, this was so crazy. This guy did
a test on me where, have you ever seen
these tests where you blow into these
machines and they test the gases that
are coming out of your mouth? They they
do it to measure if you're in ketosis.
They do it to measure the health of your
kidneys, your liver, your blood, the
purity. And this was crazy, Santos. They
were taking people and the best number,
so the scale that they were using was
from a one to a five. And five is the
worst, one is the best, right? The lower
the number, the better. The guy who was
testing me, he had all the equipment
laid out, and he said, "Every single
time I test my patients, everybody
tested a five. Once in a while, you get
a four." Now, this guy was really big on
the whole carnivore diet, no carbs, no
sugars, that kind of thing, and he was
very muscular, big guy, you know, and he
was in killer shape, really great
athlete. This guy said that nobody had
ever tested higher than him. He tested
at a three, and he attributes it to, you
know, the whole carnivore not having any
carbs or sugars. When he he wanted to
test me, he's like, I want to test the
hydrogen man, right? Let's see what this
is all about. So, I go in there, he
tests me, and I test it at a one. And he
goes, "Wait a second." He goes, "This is
impossible. Nobody's ever tested at a
one." So, he said, "I'm going to
recalibrate all my equipment." So, it
took him like 20, 30 minutes to do that.
Because he thought his equipment was
wrong. He's like, "This stuff must be
broken."
Seriously, he's like, "This doesn't make
any sense." So, he recalibrated
everything. I did it all again. Tested
at a one. He goes, "This can't be
possible." He goes, "Let's do it again."
I said, "Come on, dude. This is enough."
He goes, "No, one more time." Did it
again. I tested at a one again. And he
said, "Hold on. You're you're you're
pulling a fast one on me." He said,
"Hold on. You're fasting, aren't you?"
Because when you fast, the results
change. And even when he fasted, the
best he could get was a three. And I
told him, I said, "No, I'm not fasting.
I ate like two maybe three hours ago."
And he's like, "This is unbelievable."
He goes, "Wait, how do you eat again?"
So I started telling them that I do a
lot of the the fruits, the vegetables
because what the Japanese have
discovered is that these fibers affect
your gut microbiome just like hydrogen.
So that's why, you know, I do it because
your gut is so critical to your health,
even the health of your brain. So after
I told him, he's like, "This just
shouldn't be possible." That's the same
thing the doctor just said with the
diabetes that we reduced his insulin by
almost 80%. He's like, "This just
shouldn't be possible." But man, I've
seen hydrogen do the impossible. I mean,
think about it. It literally flies. It
ascends. hydrogen ascends, you know, and
so it was really really exciting to
prove that these theories and what I've
done with my own body and transform my
health. I mean, I'm not again, I'm not
supposed to be alive. Technically, I'm
supposed to be dead. I, you know, I was
in really bad health and so this was a
this is a really big deal and and I hope
that um, you know, this can this
information can help others and uh, so
yeah. All right. How about one more
question before we close off because I
don't really see
this is interesting. I was going to say
this. Um, someone's asking how old you
are because you look so good and
healthy. I know your age. You don't tell
people your age, but you I know your age
and you look at least
15, maybe 20 years younger than your
age. So, we won't go we won't answer
that question.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Go ahead, please.
>> No, go. You say
>> no, I was Well, I was going to say that
hydrogen is very anti-aging.
Uh, they did a study on it in Japan also
where they were testing. So, in Japan,
it's crazy. They can take your blood and
they can tell you roughly what age you
are and roughly the age of your blood.
And they did a test on hydrogen where
they took this guy's blood and they
said, "We want you to live your normal
life. change nothing, but we're going to
give you hydrogen water every single
day. Clean, properly made hydrogen. The
Japanese get this, by the way, not
America. And so he did hydrogen for one
year, and after one year, they tested
his blood again, and his blood was five
years younger after one year of using
it.
>> Yeah, sure.
>> And it does get the body to produce the
skin to produce collagen. They're
actually using it as a beauty product in
Japan. And they're also using it for
fertility, by the way. It makes men more
fertile. Um, personally, my opinion is
that if people have problem with
impetence or that kind of thing, you're
going to want some hydrogen and and
hydrogen water in your life and really
good for blood flow and uh and yeah, and
for anti-aging. So, but yeah, you can
ask the next question.
>> All right, this will be the last one.
So, blood in the stool.
Um, if you got blood in your stool,
well, you got a problem with your GI
system, you know, and you you really
want to well, for one, you definitely
want the cleanest uh hydrogen water. And
one of the reasons for that is not just
the healing aspect. Um, the problem with
blood in the stool is that you could be
having leaky gut. And the problem with
eating something, I hate to say this
because it's gonna upset a lot of
people, but again, when you eat things
like meat and then you have leaky gut
and this stuff trickles into your
bloodstream, I mean, we're talking about
risk for infections, definitely don't
consume processed sugars or soda pops
because those put you at also a high
risk uh for infection. You do not want
to get an infection. Um, and so you're
really going to want to have foods that
that help heal, which in my opinion are,
you really need hydrogen and hydrogen
water, um, for something like that. And
I would also, you know, eat foods that
are organic. You want to avoid
pesticides, herbicides. Um, I think that
you want high fiber content. Again, high
fiber is, and I don't mean a supplement,
guys. I'm talking like the actual food,
the way God intended it, you know? So,
but it's hard to say depending because,
you know, by the way, sometimes people
get blood just just from hemorrhoids.
So, it's hard to say what exactly is,
you know, causing it.
>> Yeah. Um, now I just want to show people
that uh it's 240 volts, guys. It's not a
USB. So, someone asked whether it's USB
or whatever. No,
>> plug that in.
>> That plugin is part of the technology
because uh nobody does this either in
the world of hydrogen except the
Japanese. And it helps regulate the
electrical current so they don't get
spikes which causes damage to
components.
Right.
>> That plugin, did you notice the weight
on that plug, Santos?
>> Notice the weight of it. It's not like a
cheap light plug. They're a little
heavier. They're they're
>> Yeah, it's dense, isn't it?
>> Yeah. Because it's a computer in there.
It's It regulates the electrical
current. It's really important. And so
that it can be used internationally.
That's why they sell the premium
edition, too, that is made for
international usage instead of the the
nonpremium.
>> Right. Well, I didn't know that. How
about that? So, Got to be careful not to
drop that.
>> Yeah, that's a special piece of
equipment there. Yeah, don't don't lose
that.
>> Yeah, I think that's about it with the
questions because um thank you. I'll
pass. Okay, so that's it for the
questions. So um can I book you perhaps
for the 20th uh it'll be a Thursday on
school.
>> So check real quick. I've already I've
already done a health talk
>> or if you or if you want you can join me
uh this this Thursday. You take a pick
>> this Thursday which will be the 5th uh
the 6th or
>> the 20th. Let me check that.
>> The 6th I do have
I'm busy at certain times of the day.
So, just let me know what time and we
can figure that out.
>> 2 PM Mexico Central Standard Time.
>> 2 PM Central. Do you know what time that
is? Pacific Standard
>> because I have I have something I have
to do. I have another appointment at
2:15 p.m. Pacific Standard all the way
till 400 p.m.
>> I think it's two hours later. I think
you can squeeze it in, bro.
>> Anyway,
you you let me know. Let's not let's not
work this out now. But
>> yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> For the listeners, Greg will be joining
me this Thursday or I'm going to book
him for the 20th. Okay.
>> All right, man.
>> On school.
>> And and I just again I just want to let
people know the only way that this word
is going to get out as far as how to use
super clean water because by the way
they're putting stuff in our water.
Okay? I'm just telling you right now,
they're putting things in your water to
block you both spiritually and also to
cause you ailments physically. You have
to clean your water. Watch my video 388.
I show exactly how to do it. It's not
expensive. And to be quite honest with
you, it's it's beyond
it's it's basically clean water is
priceless. I hope people understand
that. It's priceless. Okay. If it if the
machine cost $10,000, it'd be worth it.
But to clean your water, I have the
equipment right here. And mine was like
700 bucks. But that's an Americanmade
high quality carbon distiller that will
last me for the rest of my life, right?
It's so worth it. I never have to buy
water. I make all my own water. And
bottled water has the highest level of
microplastics than any water there is.
So people need to understand this. You
need to clean your water if you want
your health back, if you want your mind
back. It's just super important. And uh
I just can't emphasize that enough. Uh
spiritually, you got to clean this
temple. You know, they want it all
mucked up. They don't want you
connected. So,
>> I want to share something something with
you and the listeners. Um
>> yeah,
>> four years ago, I started noticing that
my hair
was not my hair. It felt like plastic.
Now I would shampoo it in the shower and
you know when you put shampoo in your
hair it it all the hair all has
um it's soft and and and it's all se
separates. mind was clumping together
and I thought to myself
I I tolerated it for 6 months and I
thought to myself my hair's not growing
and it feels like plastic and and I
shaved it off. People remember 3 years
ago I had bald head. I shaved all my
hair off. Right now my hair is my hair
is my hair. And this this is part of it.
It's It removes the the plastics. I
couldn't believe it. I always had
beautiful uh curly hair and it felt like
hair. Then all of a sudden it just went
plastic on me. I shaved it all off, did
all the right things, took the hydrogen
and my hair is my hair now.
>> Man, you know, like when I think when
people think of microlastics,
you have to think of the stuff that
affects you the most. I know you're
going to find it in just about
everything, but water is the one that
it's the highest levels in. So, that's
why the hydrogen helps with like free
radicals and bring all this crap out of
you. If you clean your water properly,
that helps. And then also fiber, by the
way, I kept talking about high fiber.
Fiber pulls all that stuff out of you,
too. So, all those things are important.
You got to get those microplastics out
of you. They affect you hormonally. It's
a problem. So, you know, and hormones
affect, you know, your reproductive
system. I mean, they've been finding
when they do um when they do autopsies,
they see all these microplastics in
people's like guys testicles and women's
ovaries, high levels, you know, and um
and I've had really good luck with
basically eliminating those out of my
body. And it's it's not the most
complicated thing in the world, you
know, but clean water is absolutely
essential. You got to spend some money
and get yourself a good reverse osmosis
and a good carbon distiller. And um
absolutely crucial to your health. more
than all these machines, more than all
these supplements, you got to get clean
water.
>> Yeah. Someone just mentioned don't use
shampoo. Yeah.
Well, I I I don't I don't use shampoo.
Um
so, but I I said that because I'm I was
trying to quickly get to the point where
make a point that I got rid of the
plastic. So, yeah, I I know it takes all
the oils out of your hair. I know all
that. So, but and I replenish uh I put
uh a whole bunch of um I make a tea with
horse tail and other things that are
good for hair and and I keep it in the
fridge, right? And every morning I pour
I pour a little bit into a glass and
then I get uh rosemary, lavender, tea
tree oil, um
uh what else
is good? Um mint and anyway, I put about
10 different essential oils and I just
put it in my hair. So essential oils are
very good for the hair with tea as a
base. Okay. Especially horse tail makes
your hair grow really good. All right.
Look, I put the uh school link in there,
guys. There's the school link for
Universal Truth School. Um and um you
will know whether Greg's going to join
me this Thursday or on the 20th. So,
thanks, Greg. I love you, brother.
>> I love you. It's good to see you.
>> Yeah. Um,
>> and you and you couldn't have you
couldn't have got your channel back at a
better timing when ThreeI Atlas is a
sign of the sky and you have that Mr.
Astrology on it. Come on. So, brother,
the stars are speaking.
It seems it seems like it couldn't have
been better timing. And you know what?
Accidents just don't they just don't
happen, right? This is not an accident.
>> It's it's all it's all written, man.
>> And I'm glad you're here for the
journey. I'm glad you're here because I
know you were having some rough times
there for a while and you didn't want to
be here and people need you here,
Santos. This is your your spirit chose
to come here to be you for a reason. You
got to fulfill your spirit's mission,
right? And and you're doing exactly what
you're supposed to do, man. I I'm just
You're back. I know you're back. I can
see it. I can feel it. I'm glad you're
back, brother. I'm glad you made it
through. And uh and so everybody, you
know, thanks for supporting Santos
because this is important. And yeah,
share all this information. It's
important for other people to know.
>> All right. Thank you, brother. And I
just want to say that uh I I'll probably
have Greg on for the 10th, I don't know,
ninth or 10th time on this platform as
well for the public because school is
subscription. It's where everything will
be protected, won't be taken down
because that makes me very annoyed when
I I spend two hours doing presentation.
and I say one wrong thing wrong
according to the bots and I get that
that video removed. So that's why I've
gone to school. Many people have
recommended it to me um to protect my
work and finally I thought well okay
let's do it. H but I still will be doing
down the track another one with Greg and
uh now that I've got the big channel
back. It's funny when when I first got
my channel,
um, I quickly went on a live and I said
the same things as David Ike today. He
got his channel today. I got mine back
last week. And he said the same thing.
He said, "I'm back. I don't know how
long for,
but I'm back." And and I said the same
thing. I I'm back, but I kind of don't
trust that it's gonna I don't know. Um
>> Well, we should hope that the people
from your old channel also subscribe to
your new channel. So, just in case,
right?
>> Yeah. Which is syncretatism Santos
Bernaci. So, I've got two YouTube
channels.
>> You know, and and if you subscribe to
mine and anything ever happens to
Santos, I will guide people to wherever
his new channel or wherever he's at. So,
it's good to stay subscribed to, you
know, we need to have this community
basically to support each other. It's
important.
>> Exactly. All right, brother. Much much
love and big hugs.
Take care of yourself and everyone
listening. Uh, may you be blessed and um
I really hope that the heavens can drop
2 and a half thousand
in your lap to get one of these. I
really do. I know that it's a it's a lot
for some people and people are
struggling just to to uh you know buy
food and some people are homeless that
are listening to this right now and and
probably think that they'll never have
don't think that you'll never ever ever
get these things and you'll have these
things no matter what situation you're
in. You'll climb out of it. Let me tell
you something. At the start of this year
and all of last year, I wanted to be
dead. I wanted to be dead. I didn't want
to be alive. I didn't care for life.
Never suicidal. Never have been, never
will be. But I just wanted to just go
away and just die. Well, something
happened. My very good friend Daniel,
who actually founded the Synretatism
Academy,
uh got killed in a car accident on
February the 1st this year. And I
remember
When I found out, I walked out to my
deck out there. I've got a deck, right?
I walked out and I started to cry. Like
I I think I was crying, but I was just
exuding just pain for for this. How
could how could my best friend who who
loved me and and did so much? He ma he
built the school for me because he had
no part of it. He he was buying the
Tesla coils and he was doing all the
technology stuff. He was
um uh even he had books on all the
people that were coming in and and we
had people coming from all around the
world and Daniel would book them in to
have treatments and everything like
that. So
he came to me, Greg,
I know it was him because I was
>> Yeah.
>> In your in your dream or meditation?
>> No. No. I walked outside to my deck to
to cry because I wanted to get some
fresh air and just I couldn't believe
that he that he's dead, you know. Um,
>> you felt his presence. He visited you.
>> That's it. I didn't hear any voice. No
one told me it was him. I just knew it
was him. And And what it said to me,
what he said to me was, "Straighten your
back up
and stop complaining, man. You're always
seeing the glass half empty and you're
just and immediately I just like
straighten my back up.
>> Yeah.
>> And and then and then and then I walked
inside and my life changed. I've I've
never I've never been as determined and
focused
uh since February the 1st of this year
because before that I threw everything
away. I just just threw myself in the
bin.
>> I'm so glad that that that happened,
Santos, because, you know, I've been
through the same thing as far as, you
know, wanting to disappear and that kind
of thing. And I realize that the the the
word gratitude, specifically the the
emotion, gratitude. Gratitude is so
important. And it may seem like things
are really bad now and it was really bad
for you and it's been bad for me, but
just remember that those moments are
they're like a caterpillar that can
transform into a butterfly, you know.
There you go, man. See, absolutely,
brother. Grateful, you know, grateful
for whatever, man. Because our time here
is limited, you know, and I know that we
all came here for different reasons. And
I love that like our spirits can
connect, you know, we're like brothers
in spirit, you know. Um, and we have to
do whatever it is our mission is here to
do. Our part, whatever our part is, you
know, I'm trying to do my part, you're
doing your part, and as long as we
follow spirit, you know. So, I'm really
glad that Daniel, you know, visited you
and and gave you that that comfort and
reassurance and inspired you again
because I believe that the world needs
you. You have you have I mean, I do
believe you have a gift. you you clearly
have a gift for the words, the stars,
like understanding certain concepts and
putting pieces together that not
everybody can do, you know, and it helps
people when you share a lot of this
knowledge. And so I think it's great and
I'm really it's very sad what happened,
but we have to do our part even for him.
We got to continue this even for him,
you know. And um so
>> it's it's funny. He always used to say
to me, we used to go training on the
beach, swimming, running, push-ups,
everything. and he was like my drill
sergeant, you know, I used to call him
my drill sergeant. And he always used to
say, "Stos,
I would I would die for you. I would
take a bullet for you, brother. That's
that's how much I love you." Um,
there's other people that I know that I
wouldn't do and and I wouldn't do it for
an MPC, but I would die for you. and and
then
how he changed my life by passing on.
He he actually fulfilled that. He did he
did he did me a big he shook me out of
my depression out of everything wrong
all this head jam that I had had and all
this wrong thinking and hatred and anger
and what have you. Um and uh yeah so he
probably he did do that. So, let me
finish with this on an astrological
thing. You're Liban, aren't you?
>> Um, I would, to be quite honest, I don't
know. As crazy as that sounds, because I
don't I'm don't really um Yeah, I don't
know. I'm actually not very good at the
whole
>> Okay, without telling us the year,
what's the date of birth?
>> Um,
a
uh 7:30.
>> No, no, no. I mean, I'm the 24th of
March. Aries, you're opposite me, I
believe. I can see your your face looks
Liban. And I think you told me once.
>> Yeah, it's Well, it depends on what part
of the world, but in America, it would
have been actually been August 1st.
>> Oh, no. You're Leo.
>> Yeah. Oh, yeah. I think I am Leo. I I
always get confused because they always
talk about like your rising sign and
your something else sign and depends on
the time and I again, it's not my
strength. Clearly that's yours.
>> Okay. Well, you must have something
Libra there because you've got the very
very very very horizontal eyebrows and
you've got the big big uh Liban jaw
smile and uh I you got vertical dimples.
That's Liban. You got a you got a Libra
rising. I'll have to do do your chart.
But anyway,
>> finish with the the best of the best
astrology. Everything comes from the
stars. Much love to everyone and stay
tuned for more
on this channel as well.
Bye for now. Much love.
